---
title: "ATAT: Automated Tissue Alignment and Traversal in Spatial Transcriptomics with Self-Supervised Learning"
excerpt: 'Spatial transcriptomics (ST); Contrastive learning'
date: 2023-12-8
venue: 'AI for Science: from Theory to Practice'
paperurl: 'https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2023.12.08.570839v1.full.pdf'
citation: 'Song, Steven, Emaan Mohsin, Renyu Zhang, Andrey Kuznetsov, Le Shen, Robert L. Grossman, Christopher R. Weber, and Aly A. Khan. "ATAT: Automated Tissue Alignment and Traversal in Spatial Transcriptomics with Self-Supervised Learning." bioRxiv (2023): 2023-12.'
---
Spatial transcriptomics (ST) has enhanced RNA analysis in tissue biopsies, but interpreting these data is challenging without expert input. We present Automated Tissue Alignment and Traversal (ATAT), a novel computational framework designed to enhance ST analysis in the context of multiple and complex tissue architectures and morphologies, such as those found in biopsies of the gastrointestinal tract. ATAT utilizes self-supervised contrastive learning on hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained images to automate the alignment and traversal of ST data. This approach addresses a critical gap in current ST analysis methodologies, which rely heavily on manual annotation and pathologist expertise to delineate regions of interest for accurate gene expression modeling. Our framework not only streamlines the alignment of multiple ST samples, but also demonstrates robustness in modeling gene expression transitions across specific regions. Additionally, we highlight the ability of ATAT to traverse complex tissue topologies in real-world cases from various individuals and conditions. Our method successfully elucidates differences in immune infiltration patterns across the intestinal wall, enabling the modeling of transcriptional changes across histological layers. We show that ATAT achieves comparable performance to the state-of-the-art method, while alleviating the burden of manual annotation and enabling alignment of tissue samples with complex morphologies.
